# MAJOR-PROJECT-FACIAL-EMOTION-RECOGNITION
FACIAL EMOTION RECOGNITION - 2022

Facial expression for emotion detection has always been an easy task for humans, but achieving the same task with a computer algorithm is quite challenging. With the recent advancement in computer vision and machine learning, it is possible to detect emotions from images. In this paper, we propose a novel technique called facial emotion recognition using convolutional neural networks (FERC). The FERC is based on two-part convolutional neural network (CNN): The first-part removes the background from the picture, and the second part concentrates on the facial feature vector extraction. In FERC model, expressional vector (EV) is used to find the five different types of regular facial expression. Supervisory data were obtained from the stored database of 10,000 images (154 persons). It was possible to correctly highlight the emotion with 96% accuracy, using a EV of length 24 values. The two-level CNN works in series, and the last layer of perceptron adjusts the weights and exponent values with each iteration. FERC differs from generally followed strategies with single-level CNN, hence improving the accuracy. Furthermore, a novel background removal procedure applied, before the generation of EV, avoids dealing with multiple problems that may occur (for example distance from the camera). FERC was extensively tested with more than 750K images using extended Cohn–Kanade expression, Caltech faces, CMU and NIST datasets. We expect the FERC emotion detection to be useful in many applications such as predictive learning of students, lie detectors, etc.
